Once upon a time,
a spacecraft named Rosetta was launched into
the night sky.
A long, long journey lay ahead of her to uncover
the mysteries of our Solar System.
Rosetta carried a little passenger,
the lander Philae.
It had taken many, many years to dream up
this mission...
...and now, on 2 March 2004,
Rosetta was on her way to the far off comet
67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
The adventure of Rosetta and Philae
was inspired by stories they heard from grandfather
Giotto.
Long, long ago men and woman on Earth gazed
in wonder at comets that appeared in the sky.
What were these mysterious objects?
Some thought they might be caused by Earth
breathing into the sky,
but no-one knew for sure...
until a Danish astronomer named Tycho Brahe
discovered that comets are very far away –
much, much farther from Earth than the Moon.
How could we learn more about these distant objects?
By trying to get close to them!
And getting close to a comet was exactly what
Rosetta and Philae planned to do,
but before they got to theirs, they had a
lot to prepare.
They listened in awe as Giotto told them
about a handful of spacecraft that had visited
other comets before them.
I was one of the lucky spacecraft to fly very
close to the most famous comet of all:
Halley's comet.
Halley's comet is very special.
It is named after Edmond Halley,
who discovered that many comets come back
regularly to our sky.
He predicted that one of those comets would
return after 76 years, and it did!
Time and time again, Halley's comet has come
back,
right on schedule every time.
The last time, in 1986, I was there.
Together with a bunch of friends from lots
of other countries,
we set off to welcome this legendary comet.
I was the bravest of all and flew less than
600 kilometers from the comet's nucleus.
It was a harsh place, but the sight was amazing
and I sent pictures back home.
Many more spacecraft have gone looking for
comets after us,
like your cousin, Stardust, who flew by comet
81P/Wild,
collected dust particles from the shiny tail,
and sent them back home to be studied.
Or, one of your other cousins, Deep Impact,
who made a crater in comet 9P/Tempel to see
what's under the surface.
Stardust flew by this comet a few years later
to look at this famous crater.
We have learnt a lot about comets but much
more is still to be discovered.
Comets hold many secrets about the early days
of our Solar System:
How did planets form?
How did water arrive on Earth?
And you, Rosetta and Philae,
are going to find out by doing what no space
probe has ever attempted:
orbit a comet and land on it!
Rosetta and Philae had a historic mission
ahead of them,
but the journey would be very long.
It would take them ten years
and they would have to overcome many challenges
before they reached their destination.
Rosetta needed lots of energy to get to the
comet
and got some from Earth and Mars
by flying around them seeing some beautiful
sights.
Along the way, she and Philae also went to
places spacecraft hadn’t visited before.
Rosetta found a diamond-shaped object, the
asteroid Steins,
and took amazing pictures for everyone on
Earth to see.
The diamond disappeared as the spacecraft
sped on.
Further along the way a giant appeared:
Lutetia, an ancient rock 100km tall and 100km
wide
with big craters on the surface.
Rosetta sent more pictures home of the amazing
encounter.
This was still only the beginning of the adventure.
But far from the energy of the Sun,
Rosetta was very tired and needed to rest.
Still travelling through space,
she and Philae fell into a deep sleep,
a sleep lasting for 2 years, 7 months and
12 days.
Then, on the 20th of January 2014,
with the help of everyone on Earth shouting
“Wake up, Rosetta!”
she opened her eyes and let everyone back
home know she was okay.
There was much celebration
and Rosetta’s team quickly set to work checking
her health after the long slumber.
There was still a long way to travel to reach
the comet
but Rosetta had plenty to do.
There was no time to lose.
All of the experiments that were packed on
board had to be woken up,
along with the lander, Philae.
There was still some way to travel before
they reached the comet,
and Philae in particular was impatient to
arrive.
“Rosetta, Are we there yet?”
“Are we there yet?”
When they got to the comet
they would find out all about its surface
and about the dust and gas around it,
and the scientists back home would fit all
these pieces together, like a jigsaw puzzle,
to learn about how comets work.
“Are we there yet?”
But it would still take them a few months
before they'd reach Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
Before long Rosetta was able to see the comet
in the distance.
She was getting closer and closer...
but there were still many challenges ahead.
The route to the comet was complicated
and she had to carry out some difficult manoeuvres.
She had to change her speed to match the comet’s
otherwise she would fly past.
One false move and she might not make it...
There were 10 manoeuvres to complete, but
Rosetta was determined.
As she checked them off, one by one, the comet
got closer and closer.
It was the most wonderful sight that Rosetta
had ever seen.
There was only a little way to go now,
but she knew that once she got there, there
would be no time for rest.
She and Philae had the most important jobs
of their entire lives ahead of them...
Rosetta's exciting mission was to follow the
comet as it travelled around the Sun –
she would learn all about the comet
and how it changes as it gets warmer and warmer,
while Philae would visit the surface.
But as she got closer,
Rosetta realised that the comet was much more
complex than people had first thought using
telescopes from far away.
It almost looked like two comets stuck together,
and from some angles, its shape was really
rather strange!
It was the beginning of August,
and Rosetta had to manoeuvre several times
to get closer and closer to the comet.
The nearer Rosetta got to this strange world,
the more wonders she discovered on its surface.
There were craters, cliffs, and boulders the
size of houses.
Rosetta spent many weeks studying the surface
of the comet,
sending lots of information back to Earth.
She also started to analyse the dust and gas
around the comet.
But there was always one question in the back
of her mind:
where was Philae going to land?
No spacecraft had ever attempted to make a
soft touchdown on a comet.
Philae started to pick some of his favourite
spots on the comet,
but Rosetta had to check with the experts
back home.
[Indistinct muttering]
They thought long and hard, and eventually
found the best spot for Philae to land.
Then Rosetta had to plan the exact route around
the comet,
to make sure that Philae would land in the
right place.
Soon it was time for Philae to make the final
preparations for his great adventure.
He checked that he had everything he needed
to land on the comet.
Finally the moment everyone had been waiting
for arrived.
As the world held its breath on 12 November
2014,
Rosetta moved into the exact position needed
to make sure Philae would reach the landing site
Philae and Rosetta were sad to be going their
separate ways,
but excited at the same time because this
was what they had been waiting to do.
Philae was away!
It would take seven hours to reach the surface,
but Philae wanted to get started on his measurements
right away.
He could soon see the surface in incredible detail,
and the moment he had been dreaming of had
finally arrived.
He had reached the surface of the comet!
But all was not right.
His harpoons did not fire!
Philae realised he couldn't relax yet.
He was rising from the surface again.
Philae was scared he might drift off the comet
completely.
This was not in the plan,
but eventually he came back down again.
However, as he looked around
he realized he had landed in a completely
unexpected location!
Philae immediately set to work on studying
his new home.
It took him just over two days to conduct
all the experiments he had brought with him.
After all his hard work, Philae began to feel
tired,
so he made sure to send all the data he had
collected back to Rosetta.
As the Sun set over Philae's new home,
he fell into a deep sleep,
safe in the knowledge that he did his main
job well,
that his family of comet-chasing heroes would
be proud of his achievement.
Who knows, perhaps one day,
enough sunlight would fall on his new landing
site and wake him up...
Meanwhile, Rosetta continued studying the
comet,
learning new and wonderful things
as she followed it on its journey through
the Solar System.
It measured 4 km across, and from the gravitational
pull that Rosetta felt,
she could calculate the mass of the comet:
ten billion tonnes!
Although the comet looked like a giant rock,
it was made of something much lighter –
so much so that it would float on water!
Rosetta collected samples of the gas and dust
that streamed into space
in order to learn more about what the comet
was made of
and where in the Solar System it was born.
One of the most important questions scientists
back home wanted to answer
was where Earth's water came from.
Could it have come from comets and asteroids
billions of years ago?
Rosetta was surprised to discover that the
water vapour flowing away from her comet
had a different flavour to earth's oceans.
The scientists wondered what it would mean
for their theories
of how the Solar System evolved.
There were many other types of gases too,
and it smelt like a weird mixture of rotten
eggs, horse stables and marzipan!
Rosetta also collected thousands and thousands
of dust grains, small and large.
Some of them seemed very fluffy, like the
head of a dandelion.
As the days and weeks passed, the comet looked
more and more spectacular.
Rosetta flew closer to get a better look,
but there she found herself surrounded by
a lot of dust.
Although it wasn't as dangerous as when grandfather
Giotto flew past Comet Halley at high speed
many years ago,
Rosetta still became disoriented and almost
lost her way,
so decided to continue her work from a safer
distance.
Rosetta began to see the surface of the comet
changing as they got nearer to the Sun.
She saw jets of dust coming out of pits, and
patches of ice being revealed.
Even though the comet was becoming more active,
it was still quite cold on the surface.
Rosetta measured temperatures around minus
one hundred degrees Celsius,
and it was even colder underneath!
Thinking about the cold, she worried about
Philae,
who had been asleep for several months.
She didn't even know exactly where he had
finally landed,
and wondered whether there was enough sunlight
there to recharge his batteries.
Then, one Saturday in June 2015, she received
a phone call:
it was Philae!
He was awake!
She quickly told everyone on Earth...
[Indistinct muttering]
Rosetta wanted to tell Philae all that happened
while he had been asleep
and the many exciting things she had learned
about the comet,
but the connection wasn't very good.
It was very frustrating
and Rosetta had to move to different locations
to try to find the best spot for a better
connection.
Philae hoped he would be able to do more experiments
on the comet surface
while Rosetta studied it from afar.
As the comet reached its closest point to
the Sun on 13 August,
Rosetta and Philae were very excited to witness
this once in a lifetime event.
Rosetta saw more and more gas and dust streaming
from the comet’s surface.
At that time, she had to keep at a safe distance
because the comet was so active and the environment
was very dusty.
Rosetta knew that astronomers back on Earth
were also observing the comet,
and she enjoyed seeing the images of how it
looked from afar.
It made her realize just how vast the comet's
tail was:
over 10 million kilometers.
She explored some of the tail herself,
on excursions that took her over a thousand
kilometers from the nucleus.
There, she studied how the stream of charged
particles flowing from the Sun affects the
comet.
Even though Rosetta was far away,
she often thought of Philae,
who she had not heard from since before their
closest approach to the Sun.
She hoped that he had also enjoyed the view
on the comet when it was most active.
Later, as they moved back towards the outer
Solar System,
the comet became less active and it was finally
safe for Rosetta to get closer again.
Whenever she flew over Philae’s home, she
listened out for any signals from him.
She wanted to tell him about the amazing discoveries
that the scientists back home had made
using the data he had collected down on the
comet.
They had found the surface to be much harder
than expected,
and that the comet contained many ingredients,
including some complex molecules
that could be the building blocks of life
as we know it on Earth!
Even though Rosetta could not see or hear
Philae,
she tried to make contact with him just in
case he was listening.
But unfortunately, they could not seem to
get connected.
Perhaps Philae had fallen back into a deep
sleep,
or maybe his radio was broken, but she was
still very proud of him.
After all, he had accomplished so many of
his important tasks on the comet
and he was understandably tired!
Rosetta too had made many exciting discoveries...
She found patches of water ice on the surface
of the comet
and witnessed how the ice, heated by sunlight
during the day,
turned into gas and escaped into space,
while new ice formed again every night.
Besides water,
Rosetta found many other molecules as she
studied the atmosphere of the comet,
including lots of oxygen.
[Indistinct muttering]
Scientists were very surprised to find so
much:
they thought that most of the oxygen would
have reacted with other atoms.
But perhaps it had been locked into the ice
when the comet formed 4.6 billion years ago.
The scientists were excited by what this discovery
could tell them
about the history of the Solar System.
By looking carefully at pictures taken by
Rosetta,
they also figured out how the comet got its
curious shape:
it likely happened when two smaller comets
slowly crashed into each other,
billions of years ago.
The scientists had also long wondered what
the comet looked like from the inside.
To find out, they studied the radio beams
that Rosetta and Philae had sent to one another
through the comet.
They also measured how the signals that Rosetta
sent back to Earth
changed as the comet’s gravity gently tugged
on her while she flew around it.
These experiments showed that the comet had
no caverns under the surface larger than a
hundred metres.
In fact, it was made up of a mix of loosely
packed dust and ice grains on the inside:
the comet was fluffy under its hard crust!
Scientists also came to understand that comets
were made of the dusty and icy material
left over after the planets were formed,
and so they contained some of the oldest and
best preserved material
from the birth of our Solar System.
Rosetta had made even more remarkable:
she found ingredients that were crucial for
the origin of life on Earth.
Perhaps comets had helped seed the Earth with
these important ingredients
when our planet was still very young.
Scientists would definitely be busy analysing
Rosetta’s findings for decades.
Her mission had been a huge success.
After a long search,
she had even managed to find the strange place
where Philae had ended up,
fast asleep in a dark corner of the comet.
But now, once again far from the Sun,
Rosetta was not generating very much power
and soon would not have enough to carry out
her investigations.
She could go back to sleep
but instead decided to undertake one last,
ambitious challenge:
she was going to follow in Philae’s footsteps
and land on the comet!
Rosetta was tired after 12-and-a-half years
travelling through space,
but she was very excited about her last tasks:
She would finally see up close some of the
amazing sights
she had been observing from a distance for
the past two years,
and she’d get to sample the comet’s gases
closer than she had ever dared to go before.
It would not be easy,
but the experts back home had everything figured
out,
and the date was set.
[Indistinct muttering]
Rosetta would be targeting a really interesting
place on the head of the comet.
She wasn’t going to be able to talk to Earth
ever again
once she was on the comet's surface –
after all, she was never designed to land
–
so she would have to send back her last images
and data as quickly as possible,
before saying her final goodbyes.
Even though her incredible journey was nearly
complete, she knew that,
just like the other comet explorers that had
gone before her,
the legacy of her amazing mission would live
on forever.
She felt lucky to have had so many friends
and hoped they would still think about her
and Philae from time to time.
Finally, after 786 days at the comet,
the last day of her extraordinary adventure
arrived...
On 30 September 2016,
Rosetta started her descent to the surface
of the comet.
She made unique measurements
and took many close-up photos of the wonderful
sights,
thinking of the future scientific discoveries
to come,
before she touched down on the comet for her
well deserved rest.
[Annotation on text message: Mission complete!]
[Annotation on banner: Goodbye Rosetta!]
[Annotation on book: Once upon a time…]
And so ends the amazing adventure of our two
extraordinary explorers,
Rosetta and Philae at Comet 67P.
Farewell, dear friends.
We've found them!